I say you should be breaking the call
into four quarters. And I sort of see it
like a, you know, the American football
analogy. Here's the difference. In
American football, you can have a
shocker for the first three quarters and
have a how Mary and you
[Music]
can how to run the perfect discovery
call. Welcome back to a fresh episode of
Breaking B2B. I'm your host Sam Dunning,
founder over at
breakingb2b.com. Joining me today, we've
got a bit of a bit of a special one, bit
of an unusual one. Two guests for the
price of one. We've got Richard Smith
and Mark Eden, sales leaders over at My
Sales Coach, and they freshly launched
their book, Deconstructing Discovery.
Welcome on the show, lads. How we doing?
Really good, thanks. Cheers, Sam. Yeah,
I'm really well, but I'm curious. Two
for the price of one. Rich, have you
been paid to be here and just kept it
for yourself?
There you go. There you go. So, we're
it's it's a bit of an unusual one. I
said that before we hit record. And
usually we're we're interviewing
marketing leaders or giving kind of solo
episodes around what's working today in
B2B marketing. But every now and then, I
like to throw in interviews with sales
leaders like yourself. One to keep me on
my toes and two to to keep the marketers
and founders that tune in, watch, and
listen on their toes. So, it should be a
fun one. All things discovery calls.
We're going to talk about the importance
of sales discovery calls in B2B,
mistakes that reps often make. Should
your sales team be splitting up their
calls like prospecting, discovery,
presentations, demos, follow-ups, and
all that good stuff? And do a bit of a
framework for what makes a perfect
discovery call based on your freshly
launched book, Deconstructing Discovery.
So with that, gents, how important
really are discovery calls right now and
beyond from a B2B perspective?
Yeah, I I'll I'll jump I'll jump in on
that.
Um I I think they've always been really
important. Um I think it's now critical.
Uh Sam, I think um it is getting harder
and harder to differentiate, right?
there is um I'll just choose software as
a category but of course you know I
think this is appropriate across many
other sectors and verticals is that um
spaces are getting louder and noisier um
there's new startups popping up left
right and center uh buyers are kind of
exhausted and um it's very difficult for
them to really
distinguish the differences quite
frankly between products and services
that are out there um more than ever
before. And and the truth of the matter
is is that in sales and as a
salesperson, you aren't in control of
these things. You're not in control of
how many, you know, inbound leads that
the the marketing team are going to
suddenly generate. You're not in you're
not in control of your competition and
how badly they're doing or how well
they're doing. You're not in control of
the market. And there's, you know,
obviously been turbulent times in the
economy even very recently with with
tariffs and such like. Um, so so what do
you do, right, when you're not in
control of that and you can't suddenly
get your engineering team to build 50
feature releases um to to get you on a
par with your competition. So you're
really left with, well, how do I provide
better better buying experiences for the
people I I get in front of? Really,
that's kind of where you're where you're
left with. Um, and I firmly believe, and
I've seen this in my career, is that you
can help someone buy from you by having
great conversations. Um, yes, product
comes into it and all the rest of it,
but ultimately in a world where buyers
are struggling to make that decision,
um, you if you're able to have great
conversations and great discovery
conversations your buyers, that can be
your secret source. It's been minor mark
secret source certainly in in a world
where we've been up against far bigger,
more well-known, noisier competition in
the past. Um, and so yeah, I I think
it's super critical um more than ever
before. Uh, I'll let Mark add on his
thoughts.
You tired of competitors ranking above
you on Google, stealing traffic, leads,
and mind share from dream clients every
time they're searching for your services
or offers on Google. Breaking B2B, we
fix that with our unusual approach to
SEO, content marketing, and websites. We
craft B2B SEO strategies and websites
for revenue, not vanity. Head over to
breaking B2B.com to check our results,
pricing, or to book a call with me.
Yeah. The bit that Rich said that really
is going to lead nicely is to help
people buy. Here, here's the thing.
Salespeople always make the deadly
assumption that who they're speaking to
knows how to buy. And that's just not
true, right? You you know, Rich, I know
you'll take this in the way it's
intended, right? at a LEGO. You were VP
of sales. Lots of people would have been
excited to have a discovery call with a
VP of sales, a company that size. Did
you know how to buy easily? Abs.
Absolutely not. Like I vague maybe kind
of another sort of how to do it, but
very difficult. And how many things did
you buy over that window? Maybe 15 20
things like you were there for eight
years, right? Yeah. So Rich, if you
ignore the fact he's in sales, right?
But just think him as a buyer. Over his
eight years, he bought maybe 15, 20
things. He's not an experienced buyer,
but the seller is an experienced seller.
They have 15 20 discovery calls a week,
maybe a month, depending on on where
they're at. So prospects need your help
to buy often. Um they don't want to take
hold from someone they don't trust. Why
would you, right? you you get that
feeling when you're speaking to
somebody. And the way to build trust is
to run great discovery. And the way to
run great discovery is to ask the right
questions to control the conversation to
really map out what you're going to talk
about, why you're going to talk about
it. It's to gather the information. And
you only gather information by getting
it. Right? Very rarely do you speak to a
prospect that just wants to tell you
everything. Um and sometimes you need to
get answers to things they don't even
know, right? Um, so to do that, you've
got to master the art of discovery. By
mastering the art of discovery, you
gather the right information. By
gathering the right information, you can
make the right suggestions. They
therefore trust you and they enable you
to help them to buy. Discovery is
absolutely key to to all of that and
your ability to run it. It's the most
critical part of the sales process. It's
where deals are won or or silently lost.
Um, and like anything, nothing happens
until something's sold, right? You can
have the best product in the world, but
if you're not selling anything, you can
have the best market in the world, but
you're not selling anything. You You
need to sell to build the business.
Discovery is the core component of that.
Love it. Love it. A few things to dive
into straight away as I love to stir the
pot.
So, some great points and especially
like the points around kind of building
trust and especially being in kind of
flooded markets that this can be the the
differentiator because we all know in
B2B sales, no one goes with the first
option, especially as you get into more
complex and more higher ticket
offerings, folks make a short list,
right? They evaluate three, four, five
vendors and they're probably speaking to
four or five sales reps.
Um before we dive into some more
tactical stuff, what are your thoughts
on so you're saying kind of selling is
is the differentiator and how you run
these discovery calls absolutely fine.
How much weight would you put on there?
Like dare I ask a percentage i.e. the
sales experience compared to let's say
product, marketing, building the brand
like is there is there a weightage? And
feel free to be biased because I I like
the banter. So I I'll I'll start with
this one since Rich started the last
one. I think that's a very hard question
to answer because there's lots of
factors. So I I'll tell you what I've
seen in my career. If you build a
product that has great social proof,
it's everywhere. It kind of defines a
category, people will just have biasness
and want to buy that, right? It's and
but that we we do that in our lives,
right? So trying to think of an example.
I I've got an unconscious biasness for
let's say alcohol, right? I'd want to
have a certain type of beer. I don't
know all the different beers out there,
but I've got an unconscious biasness for
a beer as I have for clothes, as I have
for cars, as I have for holidays, you
know, even like destinations. Um, that
unconscious biasness can just win. You
you can be a very very average sales rep
and take orders at a company that's got
an unbelievable product, unbelievable
space, market leading, market defining.
Of course, most people don't have that
luxury. Mo most people sell something
that is very very similar to 15 to 20
other different options in a very
competitive market space with people
that don't really know how to buy. It's
not top of their priority. they haven't
got a budget set aside and it's very
very difficult. The weight there on your
ability to run a discovery call is is
it's like 80 90%. Like that this is key
because actually it's not about selling.
It's about do they want to buy? Should I
spend my time here? Okay, they do. I
will spend my time here. I'm going to
help them realize that this is the best
option, but they're going to be the ones
that buy. I'm going to facilitate that.
I'll um I'll maybe just like add maybe a
couple of like additional stories to on
the back of that and again I agree with
Mark it's it's it's a difficult question
to give a a simple percentage waiting
answer. Um but I remember vividly and
this this happened in numerous
occasions. I remember vividly um when we
were at Refract and I we were for all
intents and purposes a David up against
some big Goliaths, right? and and we
were very conscious of that. And I
remember
um selling to a prospect who
um you know I'd had two or three
conversations with him and he said,
"Rich, I'm I'm in a really difficult
position here." He's like,
"I am being told by my
colleagues to just go and buy the the
more well-known brand, the one that the
one that everyone's got, right? I'm I'm
under pressure to do that.
Um, but I I'm finding it hard because
you've quite frankly delivered a better
buying experience. I feel like you
understand what I'm trying to achieve at
a much deeper level than what my what
what what your when I've been on a call
with your competition. Um, and I totally
got his challenge, right? Like it's
you're and ultimately if you think about
sales like selling you're you're trying
to you're trying to kind of derisk
things for your buyer and great
discovery should should help to derisk
and make your buyer feel more
comfortable. But in that situation, the
buyer did end up going ahead with with
Refract. But there were other situations
where that didn't happen where the the
big market leader one on brand, right?
Um but it just goes to show that I think
when you have the when you when your
buyer understands understands like you
the buyer feels that you understand
them, you can win your deals based on
that. And I think that's really a
powerful maybe for your audience, Sam,
startups, solarreneurs, people trying to
get their business off the ground where
they're like, "God, that I I am seen as
the risky option. I am less well-known.
I don't have the name. I don't have the
I don't have the all of the the reviews
online, whatever it may be." Um, you can
win deals by showing buyers that you
give a quite frankly. And and I
I'll just tell us finish with this one
one story and we actually I actually
included this in in our book. Um about
uh a couple of months ago um we had one
of our customers come into our weekly
sales team standup. This guy is a um VP
of sales and I asked him the question. I
said, "Timmy, um one question I've got
is I want to get in the head of a
buyer." And I said, "Tell me, what is
the most important thing for you when
you jump on a call with a
salesperson?" And he said, and again,
the exact words are in the book, but he
said something like, "I have to get the
feeling the person I'm speaking to
understands my world and understands
what I'm trying to achieve."
and he said, "They may have the best
they may have they may they may um have
the best product in the market, but if
they can't do that, then I I lose trust
in them." And I thought it was such a
powerful statement and again just kind
of backs up why having powerful
discovery conversations is can be can be
your your secret source.
I feel like this resonates a lot with
myself and it might with you guys as
well. I can't remember how old my my
sales coach is your company, but
breaking B2B, like our business is only
just 14 months old. So nearly every
nearly every discovery call I go is
almost an uphill battle because we
aren't known like unless folks have been
following me on on LinkedIn or or the
podcast, which is a small percentage of
the total addressable market there.
There's so many big boys in the SEO game
for B2B and SAS, and nearly every call
it's like we're evaluating the top
three, like you're the the undercut. And
I feel like being able to like those
points that you've said, if you can get
that prospect, whether it's a marketing
leader or a sales leader, whoever your
dream client is on side and start start
asking questions that do build trust, it
is a differentiator. So, I I do agree
with a lot of this stuff. Um, so it's a
fun conversation and I I appreciate the
story. Now, let's get a little bit
tactical. We're going to go through the
framework in a second.
But what I want to ask is you you
mentioned just now that kind of question
or information
gathering and I reckon that some
marketing leaders tuning into this,
they're starting to cringe now. They're
like, I bloody hate sales calls where
sales rep just asked me a hundred
questions that they could have just
emailed or sent me a questionnaire or
Google doc,
whatever. Um, I've asked this question
before to folks like Benjamin Denah. Um,
but curious to know your take like how
do you make a discovery call kind of
genuinely valuable and useful to a
prospect opposed to a information
gathering exercise?
Um, I think it's a great I it's a great
question. You're right. Most buyers hate
jumping on calls, discovery discovery
calls with with with salespeople because
they've had bad experiences because
those conversations sound like
interrogations. sound like, "Hey, I've
got a bunch of qualification questions
to ask you, right? I'm going to ask you
to basically first of all qualify. Are
you even worthy of my time as a
salesperson?" I mean, can you imagine
what goes through a prospect's head when
the first few questions you ask them is
like, "Oh, so, you know, what's your
what's your tech stack look like?" And
um how many users do you think like
would be you would have on your team?
Like, it just sounds so selfindulgent.
Um, and I think most sales people what
they struggle with is they um, they
actually think that they discovery has
to be like this predefined set of
questions that they need to go and ask
ask their buyer. But also, I think quite
frankly from experience, most discovery
calls end up just being like actually
not that at all. It's a salesperson
comes on and just wants to talk about
all the great things about their product
and their business and just go straight
to showing features and features and
benefits. Um, on the flip side, what
makes a great discovery conversation is
still asking questions, but questions
which actually sound like a
conversation. Questions which are driven
by what you last heard the prospect say,
not a checklist, but you're you're
you're asking questions based on what
you're hearing the prospect say. You're
getting curious. you'll get going
deeper. You'll kind of I'll give you a
great example of this. Um I was on a
discovery call this morning with a CRO
and I asked them a question. They gave
me an answer. I didn't really understand
what they meant. And I said, "Listen,
I'm I'm really I'm sorry. I just didn't
really understand what you said that I
want to make sure I understand it
because I think it's important. You said
X. Can you tell me what you mean by
that?" Now, that is inherently sounds
massively different to the types of
questions that most prospects get from
sales people, which sound like the same
questions they get asked again and
again. It sounds like someone who again
gives a actually does genuinely
want to understand because they're
seeking to help. So, um I agree. I agree
that the reason buyers traditionally
hate these experiences is because they
don't feel like the questions they get
asked are valuable for them. they don't
they don't they feel like it's all
intentionally designed to help the
salesperson, not help the prospect. Um,
so and obviously we we we share copious
examples in our book of of how to do
that, of how to not make these
conversations sound scripted, sound like
every other call the buyer has been on
with a salesperson that Yeah. Um, but
yeah, Mark, anything to add?
Yeah. So, I think first of all, when a
prospect engage with a salesperson,
they're not engaging with me, who I am,
and how my friends and family know me.
They're engaging with their perception
of a salesperson. And most people's
perception of sales people is negative.
That might not be true in our bubble in
our little world on LinkedIn that we've
created where we all believe in leveling
up and this perfe that's that's not the
case but if you actually just step into
the real world and you ask the average
person what do you think of sales people
it's not pleasant right it's just not
that people have got that perception
they've got that stereotype so when they
get on the call with you they look at
you through their tinted lenses of their
perception of salespeople so you're
right if you just start going, "Right,
I've got a load of questions to ask
you." Questions like, you know, you get
that you don't want in a retail store.
How can I help you? Oh, nothing. You
mean I'm just looking. A car showroom.
What are you looking for today? Oh,
nothing. Just just looking. I just want
to push that person away. If on a
discovery call you're asking questions
that really are just so salyy, like, so
how many people in your team? How many
seats do you maybe need? People don't
like that. If you ask questions that you
really should know the answer to, like,
"So, tell me what what's the most
important thing in your world right
now?" Really, as a salesperson, you know
that. So, if you're just going to ask
these generic surface level, boring,
obvious, salesy questions, you're right.
It's going to it's going to repel you
from that prospect. But actually, if you
just focus on a conversation, a
conversation that is relevant to the
reason they even want to speak to you,
right? Because they're on the call.
They're there for a reason. It'd be so
easy just to not show up and block that
person and never to they've come for a
reason. They want something. If you
focus the call on that and frontload
your question with, look, this is the
reason I'm going to ask you these
questions. I'm I'm doing that so I can
present the right solution. Now, I might
not even be able to do that. What I have
might not be for you, right? But help me
understand your world. Why you're even
here? What do you want? From there, I
can share some ideas that may or may not
be relevant. Then you shift from a sales
call to having a conversation with
someone that potentially has what you
want. And you start to trust them
because they don't sound like a
salesperson. They sound like a
consultant. And that is a totally
different shift that most sales people
struggle to do because they stick to
their script. That's what they've been
trained. they fail to ask those tough
questions because they don't want to
upset the prospect or they're connected
to the outcome or they ask the sales
questions because they're worried about
their targets, their quotas and they've
got that commission breath. Um, and
that's where it all starts to fall down.
That perception of a salesperson and you
really matching up to that.
Yeah. Yeah. I like it. And I'd argue,
especially on the inbound perspective,
like some of those basic ones, your your
website should be doing some of that
hard work for you anyway in terms of
capturing a lot of that info around kind
of what they actually want to get done
and then you can stick to the meaty
questions, the in-depth stuff for the
sales discovery. So, we've started
you've started sharing out some some
tactical stuff there. It sounded like a
bit of an upfront agenda, which is nice.
So, it'd be cool to know. I know you've
got a framework that you share in in the
book. So, I think it'd be cool to dive
straight into kind of some action items
like if anyone's tuning in and they want
to ramp up their discovery sessions and
make them more productive from now, like
what is what is that step one that you
just shared there or is there a step
before? Let's let's kind of roll through
the framework. Well, the first step is
preparation. Like Rich in the book, this
is Rich's framework that he's, you know,
perfected and he's had influence on for
sure, but the the Prepco framework, but
that takes you through what to do
before. Then there's on the call,
there's a framework for really how to
run that call as well. I'll let Rich
talk through Prepco, then I'll talk
through when you're on the call sort of
the four quarters of the call and how to
run it. Yeah. and and and I think that
the the challenge that I see so many
people having Sam is especially in the
world of like virtual selling is where
like we're in this kind of habit of like
jumping from Zoom call to Zoom call and
almost kind of winging it and you know
when I when I think back to like calls
that typically don't go well for me so
often it's because I I didn't actually
prepare for the conversation. So, so
this framework, you know, really takes
you through and I'll not go through all
of it, but it's designed to be like 20
minutes, 20 minutes time that will help
you have not just the right
understanding and background behind who
you're about to speak with, but gets you
in the zone of okay, what how do I
envision the first sort of five minutes
of this conversation sounding and what
are all of the possible outcomes that
could happen at the end of this call?
And even just having that is a massive
leap forward to what so many people uh
have, which is I'm just going to jump in
this call. I'm I've just clicked off end
call off my last call. Uh I'm going to
quickly just bring up the person's
LinkedIn profile. Yeah, okay. They're a
this is their job title, right? I'm I'm
straight into it. And so Prepco
basically starts by, you know, spending
time looking at their LinkedIn. Like
what can you learn about them as a
person? What they've decided to share?
like do they do they share things that
they are passionate about? Do they share
things on their profile that things that
they are focused on right now? Like a
lot of people will actually put like
their top three areas of focus as a as a
business. How can you start to connect
the dots between what you sell and what
that person is interested in? What kind
of person do they appear to be? Right?
Do they appear to be quite serious and
direct? Do they look like they're
someone who's a bit more energetic? Do
they look like someone who won't want
all the detail or do they look like
someone who you're going to have to go
slower with? A lot of the time people
aren't actually figuring this out to
actually get on the call. Actually, you
can start to do this before you actually
get in the conversation. There's and
that could help you understand like,
hey, maybe I don't I shouldn't be asking
30 questions to the pe the person who is
a bit more direct who just wants things
simplified. Um all all the way through
to like um company news, right? Like we
got the all these amazing AI tools now
that say hey like you can create prompts
to say give me the give me the
background to this business over the
last year. What what investment have
they had? You can use oldfashioned
Google alerts or Google news to search
for the company's CEO. What's the CEO
been talking about in the press in the
last three months? Because that often is
a big giveaway to strategically what
everybody in that business is going to
be focused on. Um so like this framework
people think oh I need to spend like
three hours re researching preparing for
my call you don't you can do 20 minutes
and you can be immensely prepared and in
the right frame of mind to basically go
in go on that call and above anything
else Sam is like showing the person the
prospect that you're different that
you're not just jumping from call to
call that actually you come on the call
and something as little as hey I I I
noticed that you've been in the role for
seven months now um what have you
learned in that time? And it's like how
many prospects get asked that question
where the
salesperson's gone to the like immense
effort of seeing that they've been in
their role for seven months which takes
like two seconds. It's little things
like that that can make all the
difference that can make the prospect
again feel like this isn't just another
sales call. I'm here with someone who is
actually looking to help. So, um, yeah,
I in the book, Prep Code goes into a lot
more detail than that, but it's designed
to be a a quick framework that gets you
fully prepared, uh, in 20 minutes for
the call. It's a nice touch and I think
some of this is undercooked. So I'm in a
bit of a bubble because a lot of my
connections especially on LinkedIn are
B2B marketing SAS marketing leaders and
they talk so much especially now a lot a
lot of folks are talking about brand
marketing and differentiating in the
marketplace which is all good stuff
don't get me wrong but they often as a
lot of them aren't actually doing the
selling and I think this is where folks
like us have got a bit of advantage like
I'm doing founder sales because I'm I've
only got two FT two full-time employees
and trusted contractors and you folks
have been selling for donkeys years they
don't actually realize some of these
nuances that come in actual sales
conversations like discovery calls and
they don't realize that there is areas
to win in things like this, not just
discovery calls, but all aspects of the
sales process. And I think it's
something that's overlooked, especially
by marketing leaders, not out of
ignorance or anything like that, but
purely because they haven't necessarily
done the role. Um, don't know what your
thoughts are there.
Yeah. I I mean, and I I I guess I'm I've
got an unfair advantage that I I've I
sell to the the people that I the person
that I used to be type type of thing.
But that being said, like you don't you
don't have to have walked in that
prospect's shoes to do a good job here.
It definitely helps, don't get me wrong,
and it can help with your credibility.
But again, like the things that we've
shared on this call, so on this uh this
this this this podcast so far, like are
things anybody can do but can make you
be different, right? There is so much
average out there, Sam, and it's not
necessarily down to like average reps.
It's not their fault. Like a lot of the
time they've just never been shown how
to do it. Um, but it's really not
difficult to just make the prospect,
even if you're like, "Hey, I've been I'm
an account exec with two years of
experience. I'm about to sell to a CMO
who's like got 15 20 years experience in
marketing leadership. What do I know
about about about their role?" Well,
I'll tell you what, you might not know
as much as they do, but you can
certainly make them feel different.
Yeah. Yeah. I like the small touches.
Cool. Let's um I like the I like the
research points. So let's let's jump
into what Mark's got for the the
tactical stuff in terms of running the
discovery calls. Yeah. So at its highest
level, and obviously it's really broken
down in depth in the book, but most
discovery calls are 30
minutes. I always think the way to bring
to life how little time that is is 3
minutes on small talk feels quite
reasonable. It's 10% of your time,
right? Like it just it goes so quick.
Checking calendars, right? could easily
take two minutes. You you lose so much
your time on on lots of things. Um I I
say you should be breaking the call into
four quarters. And I sort of see it like
a you know the American football
analogy. Here's the difference. In
American football you can have a shocker
for the first three quarters then have a
how Mary and you can
win. It is the complete opposite when it
comes to discovery. You have to start
strong. You got to win from the start.
And actually, if you win from the start,
you're gonna be pretty crap at closing.
It just happens, right? Because they
they bought into you. So, I break down
to to the first quarter is really that
small talk. Get that out of the way as
quickly as possible. Obviously, you got
to have a little bit, but people confuse
small talk for rapport building. Rapport
building happens all the way through.
Small talk's kind of like, how you
doing? Notice there's a bike in the
background. You you ride, right? Um, but
then you get the golden minute. The
golden minute is is the key part of the
call. This is why you're here. Why? Why
have you chosen to come here? Of all the
things you could do, of all the things
you could speak to, why are you speaking
to me, the
salesperson? What they say then, how
they say it, the words they use, the
language they use, the emphasis they
put, their tonality, their energy, their
body language, and actually what they
don't say as well, right? the pauses,
the
inclinations, what you do with that
information will make or break your
discovery call. And that is where most
reps go wrong. They waste it. They just
absolutely waste it. But you got that
small talk and golden minute. That's the
first quarter. The second quarter is
deep discovery. What What's the goal
here? What are you trying to achieve?
Why? Why does that even matter? The
third quarter is okay, there's something
tangible. Now let's dig
deeper. Let's clarify. Let's create some
pain and urgency. And no doubt there be
some statement or objections. And people
can confuse the two for the same thing,
right? Statements or objections. But
then you've got Q4. You need to have
time set aside for what the next steps.
Again, I see so many reps get here and
they're like, "Oh, I'm only halfway
through." And they lose the prospect
because the prospect's jumping in.
You're just one of their calls today,
right? they've not been looking forward
to this. They've not been preparing for
it. You're just one of their calls that
day. Um so the the fourth quarter is
that the next steps and the time
commitments and and it's vital that you
don't lose the control there because
that's when you don't get the next step.
So that's my sort of structure for for
running a discovery call, the four
quarters. But it have to start strong.
I love that golden minute at the start
as well. It's popular phrase. I think I
think we coined it. I took it from
something that was called the golden
hour which was is it's like a detective
phrase that basically if you get to a
crime scene you've got an hour the
quicker you can work with what you've
got in that hour the better chance
you've got solving the case and I think
that first minute which really is like
three or four minutes is the golden what
you do with that leads to how successful
you're going to be. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So
we've got quarter one small talk quarter
two deep discovery. Quarter three,
digging deep into what was discussed
previously and then is that right? And
then four next steps. Yeah. Okay. So,
let's leave small talk because I think
folks will know what that means. Um, in
terms of deep
discovery, what what does that look
like? I mean, you can give an example.
Perhaps we're selling kind of some kind
of B2B SAS or software or something like
that. Like what are we digging into? Are
we digging into things like why they
want to look at now and what their goals
are or is it a bit more to it? like give
us some examples if you can.
We structure we there's there's a
chapter in the book Sam called getting
to compelling reasons to buy and this is
ultimately like if you can't get there
on that first call then the chances of
that deal going anywhere are very slim,
right? Um because if you can't get to a
place with your prospect where you
understand what their compelling reasons
to buy are um and they believe that you
have a solution for that,
then you're going to run the risk of
like basically being strung along
potentially by a prospect who can't say
no to you. um and you end up in chase
mode and your your pipeline is full of
deals that are just hopeful deals,
right? That just sit there and collect
dust for weeks, months on end. Again,
the the challenge people have is how do
I get there, right? Because and that is
the really difficult for a lot of people
to do is how do I get to a point where a
prospect shares their compelling reasons
to buy? Here's the thing. You have to
get comfortable very actually that not
every prospect you sell to will have
compelling reasons to buy, right? If
they did, it would be easy. So, you have
to find you you have to understand the
questions to ask and how to ask them to
establish does basically the full
answers to the to this to full answers
to these questions. Does this prospect
have a a problem that I can solve? What
I mean by that is when the prospect
opens their mouth, do they say things,
even if they're super high level, that
sound like the types of things that
people who went on to buy from you
before have said before? If they say
things that don't really sound like
things I solve, it's a deal that you
don't want to pursue time with. Number
two, how big is that problem? Very, very
key here. People talk about problems all
the time. I had a prospect yesterday
that told me they had a massive massive
uh they had a they had this, sorry, they
had this problem around um their sales
managers not being able to forecast very
well.
sounded like a big problem, but when it
came down to it, they were like, "Do you
know what? This is a this is a problem."
Like a constant topic of conversation,
but we're focused on these two other
things right now instead. Right? The
prospect decided the problem was was a
problem. It just wasn't big enough. The
third question you need to get the
answer to is if you establish that the
the answers to the first two questions
and they're both yes is okay but is the
prospect wanting to solve that big
problem now or at least in the very near
term. People live with big problems in
their lives all the time but sometimes
don't take action on those things.
Right? Like it it we can all think of
those things in our personal life that
are like you know are big problems. they
were in your mind but you don't take
action on them for numbers of different
reasons right um and if the answer that
if the answer to that question is yes
then the fourth question that you need
to answer is okay so why should the
prospect choose you to solve that big
problem now versus somebody else or try
or alternatively try to tackle it
themselves internally
um so I think it would it's just taken
it would be take too long to talk about
exactly how to do that It's laid out in
in our book, but ultimately like if you
think of those four killer
questions, that is the like the the
staple of like ultimately dictating like
does your discovery call, should your
discovery call have a next step or or
not? And I think too many sales people
probably quite frankly are quite good at
maybe getting the answer to question
one, but struggle to get the answers to
two and three. They struggle to they
struggle to figure out is this a big
problem? And do you know what a lot of
that is? It sounds so
simple.
They fear asking the prospect the
question quite literally. So this is a
you said this is a problem
like how big is this problem, right?
Like is this is this something that you
can live with?
Mark has taught me a brilliant question.
always learning off each other like
where a prospect says yeah I'd like yeah
I'd like to solve that and Mark's
question which I now ask is so when you
said I'd like to solve it that's
different to I need to solve it is this
a like to solve or need to solve problem
because they're two very different
things and it's amazing what happens
when you ask that question to prospects
they go h yeah that is a good point
um probably like more and that's great
right that's the answer I'm looking for
right it's but ultimately I think people
struggle to get to compelling reasons to
buy because they simply are nervous
about asking the questions that get them
to truth and um we see this in sales all
the time people just basically anxiety
to ask
direct sometimes challenging questions
to prospects that that helps them helps
them uh basically get to a point of
understanding the reality yeah yeah some
some great points
And I think I used to be that rep,
right? Cuz whilst I I maybe call myself
a marketer, but I do a lot of sales
being the founder of Breaking B2B. So I
used to be that person. I used to be
scared stiff if I was speaking to a
marketing leader or a revenue leader.
getting on calls with them, I'd be like
I'd ask them a kind of set maybe of
scripted questions on discovery calls
and then take their answer as gospel
truth and that have have done with it,
send a proposal and hope for the best
and then wonder why kind of we close
like one in 20 deals and not really
think much more of it. As the years have
have gone by and I've interviewed kind
of smart folks like you, read a ton of
books and learned the hard way, I
realized that's not always the case and
what you said, a lot of it rings true.
Now, for for younger reps or folks that
are leading sales team, how can they
kind of get their reps to that level
where they're not scared, they're not
anxious, they see whether it's a
marketing leader, a sales leader, a
product leader, an engineering leader,
whoever that they sell to as a peer as
opposed to someone above them.
How can you kind of speak get I guess
get your confidence level to you're on
the same level as them if they've given
a fluffy answer or they've raised a
problem but you're not sure if it's an
expensive problem they're actually
motivated to get done with like how
can we how can we get ourselves there
so I think there's a few things at play
here right f first of all we're talking
about confidence and mindset imposture
syndrome everyone's got that right but
confidence really is a result of
competence
When you feel confident in doing
something, when you feel competent in
doing something, the confidence comes. I
always remember, you know, passing my
driving test. The first time I got in
the car by myself, I remember saying to
myself, "This isn't right. I shouldn't
be allowed in this car by
myself." Still,
fake news. Um, but no, yeah, but like I
do remember getting in the car thinking,
I shouldn't be allowed in this car. Even
though I'd passed my test, I I didn't
have the confidence that went within a
couple of hours. I remember joking with
my friends, seeing a learner driver
going, "Oh, I've got no time for them."
Like just like having a bit of a laugh,
you know? But when it comes to running
sales calls, you've got to make sure
they've got the competence and the
confidence will come. You you can mask
confidence, but the competence you
can't. You either can do it or you
can't. And a sales leader's number one
job is to coach, train, and develop
their sales team. Here's the problem.
They don't have the time to do it.
They're stretched really thin. They've
got loads of urgent action items.
They're really busy, and they're not
measured on that. So, you can always
wait till tomorrow, right? I I'll coach
them tomorrow. I'll just jump in. I'll
do this call myself. I'll help them.
I'll write the email. Um, it's the
manager's job. this it should be their
number one responsibility to coach and
train the team. Um but they struggle for
lots of different reasons and that's why
so many companies and sales leaders work
with my sales coach, right? To amplify
and accelerate that that development of
the team. But that's what it all comes
down to making sure your team actually
have the competence to do it. The
confidence imposter syndrome will all
go. Um not completely though. I still
get nervous going on some discovery
calls, you know, that I can see someone
LinkedIn profile and they can look uber
scary, you know, very stern LinkedIn
photo, maybe it's black and white, maybe
they're slightly tilted looking away,
maybe they've got very serious language
and I can think, you know, I'm I'm
in for a tough time, you know? Yeah.
Yeah. I actually had one like that the
other day. This was the first this was
one of the first discovery calls that
generally shook me. Like this was quite
a late one as well because because we
work with quite a lot of US clients. So
some some days I open up my calendar to
like 8:30, 9:00 p.m. at night so it can
suit PST time zones in US. And I think
we actually got this lead from a cold
email and then we'd sent them like a
Loom video with an SEO uh website
review, gave them some action actionable
ideas and they agreed to a discovery
call. And usually like marketing leaders
are are reasonably laidback, sometimes a
bit stern. And so I kind of jumped on
the call, did my usual thing, said like,
"Looking forward to the convo. Sounds
like you've looked at the video, and I
guess really I've I've given you some
action items. What would you like to
have happen by the end of this chat?"
Um, and he he came at me straight away.
He was like, "I've got no time for sales
questions. I want to know exactly what
you can do for me. I can see the
process. Otherwise, you're wasting my
time." And I said, "Look, I can show you
some stuff." And then he then he barked
at me again. He said, "I've got no time
for questions." Like full on. Like I was
literally like this. What the heck's
going on? like literally barking at me.
And I said, I wouldn't have done this
years gone by. I said, look, this has
got to be a conversation. There's got to
be some back and forth. I
can I can give you some ideas, but I
have to ask some questions to understand
one, if you're a company, we can help,
and two, exactly what you're looking
for, otherwise I'm just going to give
you generic information. Then he took a
step back eventually and said, "Okay."
So, it it shows you even after doing
this for a long time, you can you can
get taken by surprise on these calls.
True. True. But in in fairness to
yourself, Sam, you probably saying like
you probably wouldn't have done that a
few years ago, right? Right. You would
probably just just just kind of all
right, I'm just going to give you a
generic presentation or whatever it may
be. In interesting there is a chapter in
the book called the difficult prospect
which basically gives like lots of
different scenarios very similar to what
you've described there that all sales
people have faced where they get
challenging prospects on on calls and it
kind of talks through like um
transcripts and and and of of where of
of where we've been in those situations.
But here's why what you did works so
well is you didn't do what most sales
people do and what that person's
probably used to of sales people
probably just capitulating and actually
saying you you made yourself more of a
trusted adviser by simply saying listen
if if that's the way you want to run it
like I know from experience that's not
going to be a valuable use of your time.
Um, and they change their tune, right?
And it's a classic thing in discovery of
I call like going left when like you
look like you're about to take it all
away from them. They they they they they
pull you back in. Like the example I one
of the examples I gave in the book
similar to yourself is when you get on a
call with a prospect and they look
really distracted. Like they look like
stressed. They look like really they
don't want to be there quite frankly.
Maybe they're just like this is the last
call they needed on that day. And you
can visibly see in their face that
they've probably got a dual screen.
Their eyes are like over there like
typing emails to someone on Slack. And I
had this had this very recently in fact.
And I said I said, "Listen, James, I
just get the impression just this just
looks like a terrible time to be having
this conversation. Should we just like
pull the plug on this now when we can
maybe talk tomorrow?" It was amazing
what happened. He was like, he looked at
me and was like, "Nope, you've got my
full attention." and he literally, it
was almost like the second screen
vanished. Um, and it was because I
called it out. I did what most people
sales people wouldn't do. Most sales
people like, "Oh, I've got to make the
most of this call. I can't I can't have
this call be pushed back." And actually,
like, if I didn't do that, it would have
been a pretty mediocre conversation,
quite frankly, because I knew he wasn't
all in the room. Um, general theme
coming out this conversation is being
different. is going against the grain of
what a lot of prospects, buyers have
experienced with salespeople. Um, that
can be the thing that can make your
conversations and make you just be seen
as a as a as a more trusted adviser on
the on a call. Yeah, love it. So just as
we wrap up guys, I'd like to know if
there's any other pointers that folks
should consider when it comes to
building trust on these calls and also
what your recommendations are in terms
of you said it at the start of the call.
Um see if a next step makes sense. What
does that look like in terms of I guess
either qualifying in or qualifying a
prospect out?
Yeah, I I'll give I'll just give one tip
and then I'll I'll let Mark jump in with
his.
Um, I think one thing that can help
build trust on a discovery call is
telling prospects like who you're not
right for. And
um, you know, there's a there's a part
in the book that that that is about like
positioning statements and saying, "Hey,
like if you were telling me that this is
what you care about, this is what's
really important, I'd actually say we're
probably not the best fit. like that's
not really what we are strongest in or
that's not something that we put a lot
of focus on quite frankly. Um and when
you say that to prospects it has this
almost magical power of like them
feeling like
ah I trust this person more because
they're not telling me that they're
great at everything or that they
specialize in everything. And it helps
you actually spend more time with the
right types of prospects too. So when it
comes to answering that killer question
number four like why are you best placed
to somebody else start that start that
statement start that kind of response to
say hey I'll tell you if if we were on
this conversation and you were telling
me that these one or two things were
really important to you I'd be saying at
this stage we're not the right fit
however you've mentioned to me that
actually this is what's important to you
and you want to make sure you get this
right and normally when I hear those
things. That's normally why people opt
to work with us for these reasons. It's
a it's a superpower. It can make people
just almost feel like they're at the
right place or maybe at the wrong place
and that's fine. If they're at the wrong
place, you establish that you call it
quits. But yeah, I'll I'll finish on
that and I'll let Mark jump in with his
um I'm somewhat conscious of time just
being completely transparent. I I think
look, here's the headline. If the
discovery is done well, the next step's
just logical. logical for you, logical
for them, they're easy to buy into. If
there's ever any friction, something's
gone wrong.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I love I think that's
a good marketing and sales lesson. Know
who you're for and know who you're not
for and be clear and transparent about
that because that goes a long way. So,
with that said, Richard, Mark, really
appreciate the conversation. A lot of
gems for me and I'm sure everyone
watching, listening in. So, please do
tell us more about the brand new book,
My Sales Coach, and anything else you
want to plug. Tell I'll hold the book up
and I'll let Mark talk about it. Do you
know what? Michelle bought it in on the
on the slide. Um, Deconstructing
Discovery is is the book that me and
Rich wished we had at the start of our
careers. It is tactics, thought tracks,
frameworks. Is there's no theory in
here. It's all actionable from the
minute a call gets booked all the way to
the very end stages of your discovery,
including negotiation and and final
steps. It's it's literally just a book
that you can pick up, go to any chapter,
and start to take away advice that you
could implement into your own calls. Um,
it's out today and Rich, this is
breaking news. Whilst we've been on the
webinar, it has become a number one
bestseller. So, that is what we're
aiming for. Um, which is awesome. Um,
yeah, today and today only it's $7.99,
which is the cheapest Amazon would let
us put it. We wanted to really help make
it accessible to everybody. It'll be
$11.99 from tomorrow and and it will
never return to this price ever again.
Um, but yeah, it's it's a book all
around how to run discovery calls like a
pro and it will help you have better
conversations, better outcomes.
Nice one, gents. really appreciate the
chat and yeah, make sure you get
yourself a copy or get your sales team a
copy of Deconstructing Discovery or at
the very least follow Richard or Mark on
LinkedIn sharing some some great stuff
on on sales tips each and every day. So
with that lads, thanks very much.
Enjoyed the chat. Thank you S and Mark.
You don't have to choose between us. You
can follow us both.
And if you haven't yet, why not join
thousands of B2B legends enjoying my
weekday newsletter for unusual B2B
marketing strategies, SEO tips, weird
experiments I'm running, and fresh
podcast updates. Head over to
breakingb.com and hit that newsletter
tab. And with that, I shall catch you on
the next one. Cheers.